>> SHADI ABOU-ZAHRA:
Just a little bit about
the project itself.
WAI-Tools Project is
an acronym for Advanced
Decision Support Tools for
Scalable Web Accessibility
Assessments of the Web
Accessibility Initiative.
So, WAI-Tools.
So, it's a project of
the W3C Web Accessibility
Initiative co-funded by
the European Commission,
the EC, under the
Horizon 2020 program.
It's a so-called
Innovation Action project.
So there are different
types of projects that the
European Commission supports
and this is one of them.
It's under the line
of innovation action.
It started on the 1st
of November in 2017.
It also - it already
feels like many decades ago.
And unfortunately
actually, coming to an end
at the end of this month.
As I mentioned, it's
been a really great project,
great fun working
with the partners.
Speaking of the partners
of the project, the lead
partner is the European
Research Consortium for
Informatics and
Mathematics, ERCIM which
is the
European host for W3C.
So, this is the legal
footing of W3C in Europe.
Other partners in the
project are Siteimprove
from Denmark, the
Accessibility Foundation
in the Netherlands, the
Norwegian Digitalisation
Agency, Digdir, and
the Administrative
Modernization
Agency in Portugal, AMA.
The University of Lisbon,
FCID, in Portugal, and
Deque Research which is
based in the Netherlands.
So, these are the project
partners who together are
responsible for moving
this forward, this project,
but really a lot of
this work is happening
or happened in - directly
in open W3C groups and
we're going to be talking
more about that, about how
the project work has
happened and how you can
still contribute to some
of this project work which
is going to continue
happening in these groups.
But just to give you
a little bit of the
objectives of the project,
what did we really want to
achieve with the project?
One of the main objectives
here on the screen is an
illustration where at
the very top of the
illustration is kind
of the ultimate goal.
We all want
compatible results, right?
When we are evaluating
for the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines
which is the layer below,
we're evaluating for
accessibility or testing
for accessibility,
we're using different
methodologies, so
different methods.
But at the end of the day,
we're testing for the same
set of guidelines and we
want to get compatible results.
We want to get the same
results when we test the same
things, right, no matter
how we actually test them.
And so, this was really
the focus of the project,
to look at what we
call ACT test rules,
Accessibility
Conformance Testing rules.
The point is these
are very, very small
procedures for testing
that can be combined
together for
different methodologies.
And methodologies
here is a broad term.
It could be automated
tools or anything.
Any procedure that
you follow for manually
checking, this is a
methodology as well.
So, really, anything
that encodes how you check
accessibility
is a methodology.
It could be manual.
It could be automated.
It could be a combination,
semi-automated, so a combination
of automated and non-automated
approaches together.
So, if we have very small
building blocks, and they
are depicted here as these
small boxes, these small
squares, very, very small,
like Lego pieces, we can
combine these together
to provide different
methodologies but at the
end of the day, if we test
the same thing, we want
to get the same result.
So, that's really the
objective or the vision of
the project is to try to
get consistency because we
know that one of the big
issues of accessibility
right now is that we don't
have that consistency.
We have different tools
that provide different
results or different
evaluation methods.
So, you go to one person
and you get one result and
then sometimes you can get
slightly different results
when you go to a different
person to get it checked.
That's a big problem for
accessibility that we're
trying to address to have
more consistency of how we test.
Another objective of the
project, by defining these
checks and finally
agreeing on them and not
having to constantly
re-repeat how we test
certain things, how do we
test the text alternative
or how do we
test the label.
If we can finally decide
and agree on a common
interpretation for
these checks, maybe we
can increase
automation in that.
Right now, a very large
part of accessibility
needs to be
tested manually.
But we also know that
there is a lot of advancements
happening in the technology.
Buzzwords, artificial
intelligence or machine
learning, natural
language processing.
All of these technologies
are evolving, all of these
innovations that would
essentially allow us to
increase the
level of automation.
It doesn't mean that
accessibility will be
fully automatable, at
least in the foreseeable
future, but at least we
can maybe increase the
amount of tool support
which would be - would
make things much more
effective and much more
efficient if we can increase
this level of automation.
So, these are really the
objectives or the core
pieces of the project.
The deliverables of the
project, which we're going
to go into more detail,
but hopefully from a more
applied side, is the main
part of the project, the
heart piece is to develop
Accessibility Conformance
Testing rules, right.
So, this is to create an
initial set hopefully to
get the work in the
community kickstarted to
help establish an
active community that
will sustain
beyond the project.
So, this is a call on -
call for action for you to
get involved in this
work that will continue
beyond the project.
We implemented these
rules that we developed in
different tools from
project partners in the
project, here specifically
the partners Siteimprove
in their checker called
Alfa, in Deque in their
checker called Axe-core,
and in - a tool from the
University of Lisbon in
a checker called QualWeb.
And we also validated these
rules in real-life situations.
We had a set of websites
that we took and that we
ran these rules across.
Now, these rules were
applied in different ways,
were test-driven, or were
taken up by the Portuguese
and Norwegian
observatories.
These were part of the
project to kind of really
ground us and look at when
entire countries want to do
large scale monitoring
of accessibility, what
are their needs?
What can we
learn from that?
And how can we provide
them with different types
of rules that
will support getting
them valuable information?
We looked at improving the
existing WCAG-EM Report Tool.
So, people
might know that tool.
It already existed.
WCAG-EM stands for WCAG
evaluation methodology.
It actually has a
longer name, Website
Accessibility Conformance
Evaluation Methodology.
It's a long name.
But this is an evaluation
methodology for WCAG that
can be used to
test entire websites.
And it was a tool to help
you walk through that and
now we have added to that
tool an import function so
that you can import test
results from automated
tools, again here to
show the idea that we can
combine automated and
manual when we're using
open standards here.
We also created an accessibility
statements generator tool.
So, this helps you create
accessibility statements
for your website once you
have done the testing to
explain to the world the
accessibility that you
have on your website.
And last but not least, a
demo, a proof of concept
to show, to demonstrate
the potential of open
linked data
for accessibility.
So, what if - right -
what if we had these test
results being published,
at least those by public
bodies, and we could
connect these and we could
scrape these and we
could do a more active or
decentralized
monitoring approach?
So, these are the
project deliverables.
More information
is on the website.
We will provide you these
links at the end again so
you don't need to start
looking at the links.
The address is
w3.org/WAI/Tools.
That is the project page
for the WAI-Tools Project
and you can find here
further information, all
the resources, all the
deliverables, including
this open meeting with
the slides online as well.